---
title: Method of Undetermined Coefficients
author: Tejas Kamtam
date: 2022-05-13
layout: note
parent: MATH 33B

---

#UCLA #Y1Q3 #Math33B

# Method of Undetermined Coefficients

---

## Key Definitions

**Method of Undetermined Coefficients** - used to find particular sol. to [[4.3.1-Inhomogeneous 2nd Order Linear Differentials]] if:

- $p,q$ are _constant functions_

**Trial Solution** - arbitrary possible solution given by restraints:

- must include forcing term $g(t)$
- must be "closed" (similar) under derivation (e.g. trig funcs.)

**Superposition Principle** - used to deal with lin. combs. of forcing terms

---

## Method of Undetermined Coefficients

Given [[4.3.1-Inhomogeneous 2nd Order Linear Differentials]] where $p,q$ are constant and forcing term $g(t)$ is "closed" under derivation, we use a **trial solution** containing an undetermined coeff.

### Selecting a Trial Function

The trial solution depends on the forcing term, if $g(t)$ _is not_ a sol.:

1. ##### $g(t)=e^{rt}$

###### $$y_p(t)=ae^{rt}$$

2. ##### $g(t)=A\cos\omega  t + B\sin\omega t$

###### $$y_p(t)=a\cos\omega  t + b\sin\omega t$$

3. ##### $g(t)=P(t)$

###### $$y_p(t)=p_0(t)$$

4. ##### $g(t)=P(t)\cos\omega t$ or $g(t)=P(t)\sin\omega t$

###### $$y_p(t)=p_0(t)\cos\omega t + p_1(t)\sin\omega t$$

5. ##### $g(t)=e^{rt}\cos\omega t$ or $g(t)=e^{rt}\sin\omega t$

###### $$y_p(t)=e^{rt}(a\cos\omega  t + b\sin\omega t)$$

6. ##### $g(t)=e^{rt}P(t)\cos\omega t$ or $g(t)=e^{rt}P(t)\sin\omega t$

###### $$y_p(t)=e^{rt}(p_0(t)\cos\omega  t + p_1(t)\sin\omega t)$$

s.t. $A,B,a,b,r,\omega\in\mathbb R$ and $P(t),p_0(t),p_1(t)$ are polynomials of the same degree

if $g(t)$ _is_ a sol. use

###### $$ty_p(t)\quad\text{or}\quad t^2y_p(t)$$

### Attempting a Solution

Set the trial equal to the forcing term and solve for the undetermined coefficient to find that the trial function is a particular solution

##### $$y_P(t)=g(t)$$

---

## Superposition Principle

if $y_f(t)$ is a part. sol. to $y''+py'+qy=f(t)$ and $y_g(t)$ is a part. sol. to $y''+py'+qy=g(t)$, and given:

##### $$y''+py'+qy=\alpha f(t)+\beta g(t)$$

then the general solution is:

##### $$y(t)=\alpha y_f(t) + \beta y_g(t)$$
